# WHAT A DAO #

## Introduction ##
So I hear you want to interact with a database.  We use slick to interact with databases and it is a 
very powerful abstraction.  
Slick provides:
* Type safe interface for querying a database    
* Asynchronous execution of queries 
* Connection pool management
* Functional interface to SQL actions
* Mechanism for converting rows to case classes

However, Slick can be both complicated and limiting.  
Slick:
* Is definitely not an ORM and favors towards scala tuples, which can get pretty hard to navigate (like `_._1._2._3`)
* Was written by scala ninjas so the library source can be hard to parse / extend
* Abstracts how/where queries are run via DBIOActions, so it is not obvious if queries are ran in the same connection 
or transaction. Slick provides the functionality to force queries to run together but you need to be very careful.
* Favors query building over common actions.  Typical database operations are CRUD based (Create, Read, Update, Delete)
but those abstractions are too high level for Slick to expose

"Proper" development practice stipulates that a DAO should wrap database actions. Because Slick is very low level and 
can be complicated to use, we need some other abstraction to simply provide common DAO functionality.

Therefore we built **AIQDAO** 

## Requirements ##
* MySQL Database (probably can easily be extended to support others)
* For each table that you query, you will need the typical slick abstractions.  You will need a case class to represent
the data from each row.  You will also need a "table" class that maps the fields in the table to the fields in the case 
class 
* Your database table needs some sort of ID.  Either a Long or UUID.  

## Components ##
### IdType ###
This is an abstraction around IDs a row might have.  The IdType has two functions that make it like an option because 
auto incremented rows might not have an ID before they are created.  
Common Prepackaged IdTypes:
* DbLongOptID - Id is a Long and optional (because of autoincrement)
* DbUUID - Id is a UUID stored as a byte array
### IdModel ##
An IdModel is just a case class that has an id field of some IdType.  The models representing database rows should
inherit from this construct.  You will need to implement one of these.  
Common Prepackaged IdModels:
* UUIDCustomerModel - Model that has a uuid id and customer_id
* LongIdCustomerModel - Model that has an optional long id and customer_id
* TeamModel - Trait to mix in to models with team_id
### DAOTable ###
The "slick table" representation.  This is used by slick to map between rows to models.  You will need to implement 
one of these.  
Common Prepackaged DAOTables:
* LongIdCustomerTable - Table with optional long id and customer_id field
* UUIDCustomerTable - Table with uuid id and customer_id field
* TeamTable - Trait for table with team_id field
### The Actual DAO ###
When you implement your DAO, you will be extending some version of the base DAO class.  The base DAO class is a 
hierarchy of a bunch of classes, so let's look at it from the bottom up.
#### DefaultFilter ####
A very common use case for a DAO is to have some default filter on every action you take.  Typically, you want the
caller of the DAO to be limited to objects they have access to.  All of the CRUD operations and their derivatives 
will utilize the default filters.  These default filters are traits and stackable.
Common Prepackaged DefaultFilters:
* FilterContext - Filter on customer_id
* FilterTeam - Filter on team_id if the context has one
* FilterTeamOrNull - Filter on team_id if the context has one OR if the row has null for team_id (null team_id on a 
row means everyone has access)
#### DAOQuery ####
DAOQuery will generate slick queries based on default filters and input. Most functions return a `Query` type or some 
variation.  Most functions are protected and for internal DAO use.
Common Prepackaged DAOQueries:
* DAOLongIdQuery - DAO Query that uses an optional long for id
* DAOUUIDQuery - DAO Query that uses a UUID for id
These prepackaged classes are necessary because you need to implement different ways of comparing or retrieving ids.
#### DAOAction ###
ACTION PACKED center of the DAO structure.  CRUD "action" functions are implemented here.  Most functions return a 
DBIOAction or some variation, which is Slick's nonblocking representation of some database action.  These can be
stacked into a transaction, or run separately.  The functions are protected and are for internal DAO use.
Create and Update based functions will optionally call a validator.  A validator is a simple function that takes input 
(and original if an update) and validate that all the values follow business rules.  The validator can actually return
multiple errors.  
The code to log transactions lives in this class.
#### DAO ####
YOU MADE IT!!!111!  This is the class you should be extending to build your DAO.  The functions defined here actually
run the DBIOActions generated by the DAOAction functions.  The proper calls will be chained into a transaction and most
functions return a future.  Returning futures makes perfect sense because service calls return futures, and everything
can be chained nicely.  DAO create and update operations also have optional pre and post processing functions, allowing
the developer to implement default values / values that cannot be overridden once set.  
Common Prepackaged DAOs:
* CommonDAOLongId - DAO with optional long id, customer id filter, and thrift field named "thrift" that has magic 
functions
* CommonDAOUUIDNoThrift - DAO with uuid id, and customer id filter.  No automatic thrift magic
* CommonDAOLongIdNoThrift - DAO with optional long id, and customer id filter.  No automatic thrift magic


